# Fundamentals of Groups
#math/grouptheory 

# Def: Binary Operations (Closed)
Let $A$ be a non-empty set. A binary operation on $A$ is a function $$*: A \times A \rightarrow A.$$ That is, for all $a,b \in A$, $a*b \in A$. It is **closed** under this operation. 
> Examples include addition, multiplication, subtraction on $\mathbb{Z}, \mathbb{R}, \mathbb{Q}, \mathbb{C}.$ Division, however, is not a binary operation in the sets listed above, because division by 0 is undefined, plus many $a/b$ aren't in $\mathbb{Z}$. Additionally, subtraction in the natural numbers isn't a binary operation for similar reasons. 
> In things like $\mathbb{R}^3$, vector addition, cross product are binary operations, but not scalar multiplication - this is just because it's not an operation for two vectors. It's not the group operation, but is what can make it a vector space. Dot product isn't either, because the result is a scalar, not a vector. 
> </n> 
> The power set has operations such as intersection, union, intersection, etc. are all binary operations. 

# Def: Commutative Operations
For operation $*$, then $$a*b = b*a \qquad \forall a,b \in A$$ implies that the operation is **commutative** in $A$. 

# Def: Associative Operations
For operation $*$, then $$(a*b)*c = a*(b*c) \qquad \forall a,b,c \in A$$ implies that the operation is **associative** in $A$. Remember that associativity is completely unrelated from commutativity, meaning we can't change the order of the elements all the time. 
> Note that subtraction isn't associative. 


# Def: Semigroup
A nonempty set $A$ is a **semigroup** if on which we have an **associative operation**. 

> The set of all matrices on multiplication is a semigroup, for example. 

## Def: Identity
An element $e$ in a semigroup $X$ is called an left identity if $$e*x= x$$ for all $x \in X$. Similarly $e$ would be a right identity if $x*e = x$. Then, if both cases are true, $e$ is just considered an **identity**. 

## Prop: Left/Right Identities
In a semigroup, if $e$ is a left identity and $f$ is a right identity, then $e=f$. 

> We can show this as $e=ef=f$ using the definitions of left/right identities respectively. 

### Corollary
If an identity exists, then it is unique. 

> An example of a semigroup with no identity is the $2\mathbb{Z}$, or even integers, under multiplication (an associative, binary operation). Also, natural numbers under addition.  

> An example of a semigroup with lots of right identities, no left identities: 
> $$S = \left\{ \begin{bmatrix} x&x \\ y&y \end{bmatrix} \mid x,y \in \mathbb{R}\right\}.$$
> Notice that 
> $$\left\{ \begin{bmatrix} z&z \\ w&w \end{bmatrix} \mid z+w =1 \right\} \in S.$$
> This makes an identity, and there are infintiely many of them! Just need to show that multiplication is a binary operation, you get associativity, and thus you get semigroup. 

# Def: Monoid
A monoid is a semigroup that has identity.

## Def: Inverses
Let $(X,*)$ be a monoid. An element $a \in X$ is called a left inverse of $x \in X$ if $a*x = e$ and similarly with a right inverse: $x*a=e$ if $e$ in the identity of $X$.

## Prop: Uniqueness of Inverses
In a monoid, if an element $x$ has an inverse, then it is unique ("the" inverse).

> Slick proof: Assume that $a,b$ are inverses of $x$. Then,
> $$a=ae=a(xb)=(ax)b=eb=b.$$
> So $a=b$ and uniqueness has been established, all because we have associativity! 

Now, let's take a look at a monoid example

> $(\mathbb{Z}_8, \odot)$. Notice that $3^{-1} = 3$ since $3\cdot 3 \equiv 1 \bmod 8$. In general,
> $$a^{-1} \iff ax \equiv 1 \bmod 8 \quad \text{has a solution.}c \iff (a,8)=1.$$
> This means that 0,2,4,6 don't have inverses in this monoid. 

The inverse of the identity always exists - the identity itself!

# Def: Group
A group is a monoid in which every element has an inverse. That is, a group $(G,*)$ must satisfy the following axioms for the classification: 
1. $*$ is a binary operation ($G$ closed under $*$).
2. $*$ is an associative operation
3. There is an identity $e$.
4. Every element has an inverse. 

## Def: Abelian Group

^3b0a08

An Abelian group is a group $(G,*)$ in which $*$ is a commutative operation.  ^76080d

> Some examples of groups: $(\mathbb{Z}, +), (\mathbb{R},+), (\mathbb{R}^*, \cdot), (\mathbb{Z}_n, \oplus),(\mathbb{Z}_n^*, \odot)$. Note that the star just denotes the set without 0. All are Abelian. 

# Thm: Group Properties
Let $(G,*)$ be a group. 
1. The identity is unique
2. Every element has a **unique** inverse. 
3. $(a^{-1})^{-1} = a$ for all elements in the group. 
4. (Shoes and socks property). $$(gh)^{-1} = h^{-1}g^{-1}.$$ 
5. Some powers of elements: Let $g \in G$. Then, $g^2 = g*g$, just like normal. But $g^{-2} = g^{-1}g^{-1}$ and $g^0 = e$. These all generalize!

# Thm: "Exponent" Properties in Groups
Let $G$ be a group, $g,h \in G, m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then,
1. $g^m\cdot  g^n = g ^{m+n}$.
2. $(g^m)^n = p^{mn}$
3. However, $g^nh^n \neq (gh)^n$ in general. However, **this works with Abelian groups**. 

# Def: Subgroups
For a group $(G,*)$, a nonempty subset $H$ of $G$ is a subgroup of $G$ if $(H,*)$ is a group. 

## Thm: Subgroup Criteria
If $H \subseteq G$, then $H$ is a subgroup $\iff ab^{-1} \in H \quad\forall a,b \in H.$ Note that this implies the identity of $G$ needs to be in all subgroups.  ^654c3a

> Examples of subgroups include the set that only has that group's identity. Additionally $(2\mathbb{Z},+)$ and others are subgroups of $(\mathbb{Z},+)$ which is a subgroup of $(\mathbb{R},+)$. With something akin to $(\mathbb{Z}_{12}, \oplus)$ has subgroups involving $n \mathbb{Z}_{12}$ where $n \in {2,3,5,7}$, the relatively prime group members.

Another example:

> Taking $G = \{f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R} \mid f \text{ is bijective }\}$, then $H = \{f(x) = ax+b \mid a \neq0\}$ is a subgroup. since if $f(x) = ax+b), f^{-1} = \frac{1}{a}x -\frac{b}{a} \in H$. 

# Def: Cyclic Subgroup
Let $G$ be a group and $g \in G$. If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ such that $g \in H$, then since $H$ is a subgroup, $g^{-1} \in H, e \in H,$ then $p^2 =p\cdot p, p^3, \ldots \in H$. In other words,
$$\{g^n : n \in \mathbb{Z}\} \subseteq H.$$

Then, what is the **smallest subgroup** that contains $g$? We can't really describe it by size, but by partial orders. We'll denote this by $\langle g \rangle$. We know $g \in \langle g \rangle$, and if $H$ is any subgroup such that $g \in H$, then $\langle g \rangle \subseteq H$. Clearly, $\{g^n : n \in \mathbb{Z}\} \subseteq \langle g \rangle$. Hence, they're the same set!

So, $\langle g \rangle$ is called the called the **cyclic subgroup** generated by $g$. 

> Does $\mathbb{R}^*$ have a cyclic subgroup of size 4? No - this is effectively solving $x^4 =1$, which only has two real solutions, $\pm 1$, which these elements only generate subgroups of size one or two. However, $\mathbb{C}^*$ does satisfy this, in fact for any size. For the case $n=4$, this is generated by $\langle i \rangle$. In general, consider $\langle e^\frac{2\pi i}{n} \rangle$ which contains $n$ elements.

# Def: Order of an Element
Let $G$ be a group, $g \in G$. Then the $\text{ord}(g)  = n$ is $n$ is the smallest positive integer (not 0) such that $$g^n = e.$$ This effectively gives us the size of the cyclic subgroup! That is, it needs to satisfy the following: 
1. $p^n = e$
2. $p^k \neq e$ if $1 < k< n$.

> In a group $G, \text{ord}(g) = 1 \iff g =e$.  

## Thm: Properties of Order
1. If $\text{ord}(g) =n$, then $e,g,g^2,\ldots,g^{n-1}$ are all distinct. So the cardinality is also equal to $n$. 
2. If $m \equiv k \pmod n,$ then $g^m = g^k$. In particular, $$\langle g \rangle =\{e,g,g^2,\ldots,g^{n-1}\}, \text{  whose size is ord$(g)$.}$$
3. ord$(g)=n$ implies that $g^k = e \iff$ $$n \mid k.$$
4. We have that if ord$(g)=n$, then ord$(g^k) = \dfrac{n}{\gcd(n,k)}$.


# Def: Cyclic Groups
A group $G$ said to be **cyclic** if there exists $g \in G$ such that $$G = \langle g \rangle.$$

> Some examples - $(\mathbb{Z},+) = \langle 1 \rangle$, $(\mathbb{Z}_n, \oplus) = \langle 1 \rangle$. In fact, all cyclic groups are isomorphic to one of these, infinite ones to the first and finite to the second!

## Thm: Properties of Cyclic Groups
1. If $G$ is finite with $|G|=n$, then $G$ is cyclic $\iff$ $$\exists g \in G, \qquad \text{ord}(g)=n.$$
> For example, take $(\mathbb{Z}^*_{12},\odot) = \{1,5,7,11\}$. Then, ord(1)=1, ord$(5)=2$, ord$(7)=2$, ord$(11)=2$. To find these, keep taking powers mod 12 until you  hit 1. The number of iterations is the order. None of the orders is four, thus the group is not cyclic. 
> </n>
> Next, $(\mathbb{Z}^*_{13}, \odot) = \{1,\ldots,12\}$ is cyclic because ord$(2)=12$. You don't need to test every power either, just the things that divide 12. $2^{12} \equiv 1 \pmod 12$, so it's a generator. 

2. Let $p$ be prime. Then if $|G|=p$, then $G$ is cyclic. In fact, every non-identity element in $G$ is a generator, since the ord$(g)=p, g \neq e$.

> An example of this is $G = (\mathbb{Z}_7, \oplus)$. Every element generates the set!. Additionally, $|(\mathbb{Z}^*_n, \odot)|$ is a prime $\iff n=3,4,6.$ This is because $\phi(n)$ is even for $n>2$. 

3. If $G$ is cyclic and $|G|=|\langle g \rangle|=n$, then $$G = \langle g^k \rangle \iff \gcd(n,k) = 1.$$ So if the size of $G$ is $n$, then $G$ has $\phi(n)$ different generators.

> Recall $G = (\mathbb{Z}^*_{13}, \odot) = \langle 2 \rangle$. Then, $2^k$ is a generator $\iff (k,12)=1$. So the generators are $2^1, 2^5,2^7, 2^{11} = 2,6,11,7$. These will be known as primitive elements. 

4. **Any cyclic group is Abelian.**
5. **Every subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic.**

---

# Def: Primitive Elements

Let $n>1$, $(a,n)=1$. by Euler's Congruence Theorem, we know that $a^{\phi(n)} \equiv 1 \pmod n$. With these, $a$ is said to be a primitive element if

$$\text{ord}(a) = \phi(n).$$

The order of any element divides $\phi(n)$. This comes from $a^k =1 \iff \text{ord}(a) \mid k$. 

But what does this give us? Do we have primitive elements for all moduli? How does this relate to cyclic groups?

## Prop: Primitive and Cyclic
There exists a primitive element $\bmod n \iff (\mathbb{Z}_n^*, \odot)$ is cyclic. 

> Some examples: $3^1 \equiv 3 \pmod{7}, 3^2 \equiv 2 \pmod{7}, 3^3 \equiv -1 \pmod{7}$ implies that $\text{ord}(3) = 6$. This means that 3 is a primitive element mod 7 $\iff \mathbb{Z}_7^* = \langle 3 \rangle$. 

Next, 
>Recall that for all odd $a$, we have that $a^2 \equiv 1 \pmod{8}$. This implies that **there is no primitive element modulo 8** since $\phi(8)=4$. Additionally, if $a$ is odd, we also know that $a^4 \equiv 1 \pmod{16}$. This is true because $a^4-1 = (a^2+1)(a^2-1) \equiv 0 \pmod{16}$. So there are also no primitive elements mod 16 either. 

This can generalize: If $a$ is odd, then $$(a^2)^n \equiv 1 \pmod{2^{n+2}}, \quad n \geq 1$$ which can be proved by induction. 

## Prop: Narrowing Existence of Primitive Elements
Suppose $m,n>2$ and $\gcd(m,n)=1$. Then, define $a \in \mathbb{Z}$ be such s.t $\gcd(a,m) = \gcd(a,n) =1$. Then, we claim that $$a^{\dfrac{\phi(m)\phi(n)}{2}} \equiv 1 \pmod{mn}$$

So, **there is no primitive element mod $k$ if $k=mn$** defined above. 

# Thm: Finding Primitive Elements
There is a primitive element $\bmod k \iff k=2,4,p^r, 2^ap^b$. In other words, they cannot have two distinct odd prime divisors, but other types work.

## Corollary
$(\mathbb{Z}_n^*, \odot)$ is a cyclic group $\iff$
$$n=2,4,p^k, 2p^k \text{              for some odd prime $p$.}$$

> Finding the primitive element example $\pmod{49}$: First, notice that $49 = 7^2$. Start with 3, a primitive element $\bmod 7$ (once we find one primitive element, we can find the rest just by checking the relatively prime powers to the order, 6.  ex: in mod 7, $3^5 \equiv 5 \mod{7}$. Then, a primitive element mod 49 will be of the form $3+7k$. Let's try 3 $\rightarrow$ 3 is a primitive element mod 49 $\iff$ ord$(3) \pmod{49}= \phi(49) = 42$. 
> </n>
> So, let ord$(3) \pmod{49}=k$. We know $k \mid 42$ and $3^k \equiv 1 \pmod{49} \rightarrow 3^k = 1+49A \rightarrow 3^k \equiv 1 \pmod{7}.$  This means that $6 \mid k$ and $k \mid 42$, thus if we set $k=6m$, then $6m \mid 42 \rightarrow m \mid 7$. This means that $m$ must be either 1 or 7. So if $3^6 \cancel{\equiv} 1 \pmod{49}$, then it's a primitive element. God. This may not make any sense in hindsight. 

So, $3^4 = 81 \equiv 32 \pmod{49}.$ So multiply both sides by 3, and get $3^5 \equiv 96 \equiv -2 \pmod{49}$. So, $3^6 \equiv -6 \equiv 43 \pmod{49} \cancel{\equiv} 1$.

# Def: Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLP)
Let $G$ be a cyclic group generated by some element $a$ (i.e. $G = \langle a \rangle$). So, every element in $G$ is a power of $a$.

Then, the problem is: Given $g \in G$, find $n \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $g = a^n$. 

This relates back to above we're working with cyclic group $\mathbb{Z}_p^*$ generated by $a$ where $p$ is a large prime. In this case **$a$ is a primitive element**. 

> Applied to cryptography, Alice has key $d$ while Bob has key $d$ with the goal to achieve a common key. They both know $a$ since it's public information. So Alice sends Bob $a^d$ while Bob sends $a^e$. Then, Alice takes $(a^e)^d$ while Bob does similarly - $(a^d)^e$. Both are the same modulo $p$. Both Alice and Bob have the same number, without knowing the original exponents, but it's still private due to the hardness of DLP. 

This is the foundation of **key exchange**. They found a common key by exchanging their originals. 

