# NTRU Rings
#math/cryptography 

NTRU is a lattice-based cryptosystem established in 1998 by Hoffstein, Pipher, and Silverman. In summary,  the round trip process of encrypting/decrypting a message is as follows:

1. Pick three numbers, $N, p, q$, where $N$ is prime, $\gcd(p,q)=1$, and $q >> p$.
2. Key Generation:  
	1. **Randomly** pick polynomials $f, g$ and **find inverses** $f_p, f_q$.
	2. Calculate $h \equiv g \star f_q \pmod{q}$ and publish $(N, h, p, q)$.
	3. Keep private key $(f, f_p)$
3. Encryption: 
	1. Represent message $m$ as a polynomial with coefficients mod $p$ and **randomly** choose polynomial $r$.
	2. Calculate ciphertext $e$ via $e \equiv p ( r \star h ) + m \pmod{q}$
4. Decryption:
	1. Calculate $a \equiv f \star e \pmod{q}$, scaling coefficients to be between $\pm \frac{q}{2}$.
	2. Retrieve message via $m \equiv f_p \star a \pmod{p}$.

---

## Truncated Polynomial Rings

We utilize the [[Rings and Fields - 202010151244#^54ea13 | ring]] $\mathbb{Z}[X]/(X^N-1)$ with the typical addition of polynomials $+$ and convolution $\star$.

> As an example of truncating, take $a = x^3 + x+2$, $b = 2x^4+5x^2+8x$, and $N=5$. Then, 
> $$\begin{align*}
a\star b &= (x^3 + x+2)(2x^4+5x^2+8x) \\
&= 2x^7 + 7x^5 + 12x^4 + 5x^3 + 18x^2 + 16x. \\
&\text{As is, the degree is $>5-1=4$. So move the $x^7, x^5$ coefficients.} \\
&= 12x^4 + 5x^3 + \boxed{(18+2)x^2} + 16x + \boxed{(7)x^0} \\
&= 12x^4 + 5x^3 + 20x^2 + 16x + 7.
\end{align*}$$

## Random Polynomials
The polynomials $f,g,r$ from above are randomly chosen from the set 

$$\begin{align*}
\mathcal{T}(d_1, d_2) &= \left\{ a \in \mathbb{Z}[X]/(X^{N}-1) : a \text{ has} \begin{array}{cc}d_1 & \text{ones},\\ d_2 & \text{neg ones},\\ N-d_1-d_2 & \text{zeros}\end{array} \right\} 
\end{align*}$$

As polynomials can be expressed as arrays, we randomly place $d_1$ ones and $d_2$ -1s, picking the rest as zeros. 

## Finding Polynomial Inverses
In key generation step, we need to pick polynomial $f$ so that $f_p, f_q$ exist. That is, find $f_p, f_q$ such that 

$$\begin{align*}
f \star f_p &\equiv 1 \pmod{p} \\
f \star f_q &\equiv 1 \pmod{q}
\end{align*}$$

To do this, we utilize the Extended Euclidean Algorithm, but for polynomials. In python:

```python
def find_inv(poly, mod):
    xNminus1 = np.zeros(N+1)
    xNminus1[0] = 1
    xNminus1[-1] = -1

    f_poly = ZZ.map(poly)
    x_mod = ZZ.map(xNminus1)
    s, t, g = gf_gcdex(f_poly, x_mod, mod, ZZ)
    if len(g) == 1 and g[0] == 1:
        return trunc_polynomial(s)
    return trunc_polynomial(0)
```

# Translation to Lattices 
From [[Lit - Fast Fourier Orthogonalization - 202102101933 | Prest 2016]], 

> When it comes to practical lattice-based cryptography, a quadratic cost in the dimension is rather prohibitive considering the lattices at hand have dimensions ranging in the hundreds, or even thousands. For efficiency purposes, many cryptosystems (such as \[10, 15, 16\] to name a few) chose to rely on lattices with some algebraic structure, improving time and memory requirements to quasilinear in the dimension. This is sometimes referred as lattice-based cryptography in the ring setting. Technically, the chosen rings typically are cyclotomic rings, but those are closely related to the convolution rings discussed so far.

# Related
[[Rings and Fields - 202010151244]]
[[NTRU Lattices - 202008281320]]
[[Shortest and Closest Vector Problems - SVT & CVT - 202008271210]]

# Sources
Nitaj, Abderrahmane. The Mathematics of the NTRU Public Key Cryptosystem. p. 16.

Clark, Benjamin. Understanding the NTRU Cryptosystem. p. 15.

Hoffstein, Jeffrey, et al. An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography. Springer New York, 2014. DOI.org (Crossref), doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-1711-2.

Hoffstein, Jeffrey, et al. “NTRU: A Ring-Based Public Key Cryptosystem.” Algorithmic Number Theory, edited by Joe P. Buhler, vol. 1423, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 267–88. DOI.org (Crossref), doi:10.1007/BFb0054868.
