# Time Off: A Practical Guide to Building Your Rest Ethic and Finding Success without the Stress
> @book{Frenzel\_Fitch, title={Time Off: A Practical Guide to Building Your Rest Ethic and Finding Success without the Stress}, ISBN={1734794402}, publisher={Time Off LLC }, author={Frenzel, Max and Fitch, John} }


> As Nassim Taleb noted, “only in recent history has ‘working hard’ signaled pride rather than shame.” With this false pride, our culture has descended into a crisis of mental health issues, burnout, and widespread unhappiness.

> So don’t keep banging your head against the exact same issue if you get stuck. Take some time off, focus on other things, and let incubation do its hidden magic.

> Counterintuitively, putting more energy into leisure can energize us overall.

> The transition from jazz (range) to classical (specialization) is much easier, and more common, than the other way around. It’s much easier to go deep after you’ve gone broad and surveyed the terrain than trying to explore once you’ve dug yourself into a deep hole.

> Rather than pursuing our passions in isolation, we should freely let them interfere, find their commonalities, and focus on excellence in their overlap.

> Tory believes, and so do we, that future generations will no longer define their entire lives through narrow (and often dull) specializations, but will instead follow career paths that are much less linear – paths that fork, loop, cross over each other, recombine, and ultimately lead us to more fully explore our creativity.

> Similarly, mathematician G. H. Hardy believed that four hours of conscious work was the maximum and filling the other time with too much “busy work” was hugely counterproductive.

> “The best rest for doing one thing is doing another thing,” writes Wilder Penfield in his essay “The Use of Idleness.”“It is the vigorous use of idle time that will broaden your education, make you a more efficient specialist, a happier man, a more useful citizen. It will help you to understand the rest of the world and will make you more resourceful.”

> It’s a common misconception that mental faculties tire and need to be recharged. This is only partially true. What our mind really wants is for us to change things up. So having active leisure time will not negatively affect the next day’s performance at work. It will boost our performance.

> As Alex Soojung-Kim Pang points out in his book Rest: Why You Get More Done When You Work Less, research has shown that there are four major factors contributing to proper rest and recovery: Relaxation, or allowing our mind and body to wind down. Control, or deciding how to spend our time and attention. Mastery, or being challenged enough to get into a flow state. Detachment, or being so absorbed that we forget about work.

> One person’s good rest can even look like someone else’s work. Sometimes, all that is required for good rest is a healthy dose of variety.

> Kierkegaard believed that we can find immense creativity – and avoid boredom – by rotating the mental activities and projects we engage in, just as a farmer rotates his crops. If we get stuck with one activity, if our mental soil runs out of nutrients, it’s time to move on to the next one and let our mind recover. But Kierkegaard warned that this has to be done the right way. Otherwise, it just creates more boredom. If we use it as an excuse for constant multitasking and restlessness, we’ll have completely missed the point.

> “The method I propose does not consist in changing the soil but, like proper crop rotation, consists of changing the method of cultivation and the kinds of crops. Here at once is the principle of limitation, the sole saving principle in the world…. Here is the extreme boundary of that principle that seeks relief not through extensity but through intensity.”

> We should look for relief from boredom not by doing a thousand things, but by doing a few things at full intensity and giving them the time they deserve before moving on to the next one.

> Ernest Hemingway is famous for leaving his work unfinished midsentence at the end of a day. When you already know what comes next, you can get a “hot start” the next day instead of starting from a blank page.

> Borrowing one of Walker’s analogies, running on low sleep is like trying to boil a pot of water on low heat. If we just started our days well rested, we could achieve the same – or more – on “high heat” in a fraction of the time and with much less wasted energy. And we stand to gain much more than just less wasted energy if we take sleep seriously.

> Sleep before learning moves existing memories out of the hippocampus into the cortex, freeing up space for new information, and sleep after learning consolidates the new material, effectively hitting the save button.

> Somewhat counterintuitively, a warm shower or bath before sleeping can also help cool you down. While you might feel heated up from it, the warm water draws blood to the surface of your body and allows your core to cool down, allowing for a faster and more refreshing slumber.

> Glenn Gould, one of the most accomplished classical pianists of the 20th century, credited part of his success to the fact that he “always had a sort of intuition that for every hour you spend with other human beings you need X number of hours alone.

> “Nobody gives a novelist shit for writing alone. But an entrepreneur, programmer, or musician is expected to collaborate. I disagree, for me. I prefer the life of a novelist, whether I’m writing code, music, or systems.”“If you’re not saying ‘HELL YEAH!’ about something, say ‘no.’”

> “When you say no to most things,” Sivers argues, “you leave room in your life to really throw yourself completely into that rare thing that makes you say ‘HELL YEAH!’ Every event you get invited to. Every request to start a new project. If you’re not saying ‘HELL YEAH!’ about it, say ‘no.’ We’re all busy. We’ve all taken on too much. Saying yes to less is the way out.”

> Time off is about intentionality. It’s about not doing certain things to free up time for other things (or nothing at all). What these things are is up to every one of us to decide for ourselves.

> Derek wrote in 2017, “I’ve spent at least thirty hours a week with him, just one-on-one, giving him my full attention.” Derek is trying to cultivate a long attention span in his son: “Whatever he’s doing right now, that’s the most important thing. So I encourage him to keep doing it as long as possible. I never say, ‘Come on! Let’s go!’ ... Nobody else can play with us like this. Everyone else gets so bored. Of course my adult mind wanders to all the other things we could be doing. But I let it go, and return to that present focus.” And Sivers found that through spending time with his son in this way, his own rest ethic dramatically improved: “By cultivating his long attention span, I’m cultivating my own. By entering his world, I’m letting go of my own, like meditation. By broadening his inputs, I’m broadening my own.”

> Even between lovers, real desire is only truly experienced in solitude. And the occasional distance helps us to process our own complex feelings, as well as those of our partner.

> We get it, plowing ahead with work and busyness is often easier than pausing to reflect. We prefer doing over thinking and are afraid to sit still with our own thoughts. But this mental barrier gets lower and lower the more you practice reflection until you actually end up looking forward to those quiet moments alone with your thoughts and a notebook.

> Stoicism is often mistakenly associated with a lack of emotion. But being emotional is fine. It’s part of what makes us human. However, the problems arise when we react emotionally.

> Don’t get caught up in reactivity and the resulting stress and busyness. Stay calm, use reflection to assess the situation and your own response to it, and take only the action that is essential. Then move on and enjoy your resulting time off in tranquility.

> quick to say no and slow to say yes.

> I spend considerably more time working remotely than in an office, doing things on my own schedule and largely free from distractions, and using frequent changes of scenery (at home, in cafes, in nature) to find new inspiration when my ideas seem to run out. Moving between work locations, whether on a walk or by bike, has also helped me naturally integrate incubation into my everyday routine.