# Make Noise: A Creator's Guide to Podcasting and Great Audio Storytelling
@book{Nuzum\_2019, title={Make noise: a creator’s guide to podcasting and great audio storytelling}, ISBN={978-1-5235-0863-1}, url={[https://www.overdrive.com/search?q=777074A8-9EC1-403F-9829-A6A83BF2D342](https://www.overdrive.com/search?q=777074A8-9EC1-403F-9829-A6A83BF2D342)}, abstractNote={The ultimate guide to podcasting, the fastest growing media platform in the world. A step beyond practial how-to information on podcast production or building a business, Make Noise addresses the art of podcasting, what works and doesn’t for successful storytelling on audio, from a true expert in the medium.}, author={Nuzum, Eric}, year={2019} }

[[Eric Nuzum - Make Noise_ A Creator’s Guide To Podcasting And Great Audio Storytelling (2019, Workman Publishing) - libgen.lc.pdf]]

# Storytelling
The core of storytelling are the bones to any flesh and blood story. It is vital to follow them (and follow them simply), but having any bone showing isn't good for anyone! 

> ### Stories have a clear beginning, middle, and end. There are characters in search of something and encountering obstacles. There are scenes. There are themes and meaning. There is a moral. There are surprises, twists, and unexpected turns of events.

Good narrative storytelling consists of **scenes** with **characters** that have **motivations** interacting with each other as **actions**. These actions need to be **resisted** in some way until a **resolution** is reached and a **lesson** is learned. On top of this framework, the integration of (good) **twists** will elevate a good story to a great one. 